SPIFFE client: support fetching of X509-SVID (#55453)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-spiffe-client.adoc

return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken("https://other-service.example.com").map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

== Retrieve X.509-SVID

The extension can also retrieve an X.509 workload certificate (X.509-SVID), which includes a certificate chain, private key, and trust bundle:

[source,java]
----
import java.security.PrivateKey;
import java.security.cert.X509Certificate;
import java.util.List;

import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.SpiffeClient;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.WorkloadCertificate;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;

> public Uni<WorkloadCertificate> getWorkloadCertificate() {

Reviewer: I'm not sure it is a good example where we return it over public api. It is only relevant in scope of the custom TLS setup.
IMHO we need to give an example, without worrying about the server setup for now, of how to setup a web client and the example should have two parts - set the keystore and then with a comment that it must be done only if you server certs are svids too, show how to set up the bundle

Reviewer: Or show the client setup and the server setup as 2 distinct examples

Author: > I'm not sure it is a good example where we return it over public api

it is terrible example, but it goes down to the current capabilities (like the fact that we don't provide a way to create keymanager/trustmanager/ssl context ...)

> It is only relevant in scope of the custom TLS setup.

I am not sure what a custom TLS setup means in this context. If you mean a TLS set up by users, I agree.

> IMHO we need to give an example, without worrying about the server setup for now,
> Or show the client setup and the server setup as 2 distinct examples

concentrating on the client's setup is fine with me for this PR

> of how to setup a web client and the example should have two parts - set the keystore and then with a comment that it must be done only if you server certs are svids too, show how to set up the bundle

You are talking about situation when:

- client presents x509-svid
- server presents non-SPIFFE x509 certificate

I think that is what Andrew Block https://github.com/sabre1041/postgresql-spiffe-demo does, right? But there is a hack https://github.com/sabre1041/postgresql-spiffe-demo/blob/56404dcb211decbdcbf62be975204c4b9c589ba2/deploy/postgresql-spiffe-client.yaml#L47 that allows workaround the fact that PG doesn't understand x509-SVID.

I am simply worried whether we should present such a scenario, because I don't know how real-world situation is it. I can be wrong. Do you have some examples that it is actually used this way?

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Just show what one can do with the current capabilities as you did in the integration test and those examples will evolve as we progress.
Also, we can't expect all consumers be able to do this kind of direct submission of X509 and Private key objects. 
But showing an example of this content returned over public api is not helping users to use x509

Author: > @michalvavrik Just show what one can do with the current capabilities as you did in the integration test and those examples will evolve as we progress. Also, we can't expect all consumers be able to do this kind of direct submission of X509 and Private key objects. But showing an example of this content returned over public api is not helping users to use x509

alright

Reviewer: @michalvavrik should it be an array of strings ? I'm not sure if TLS registry can have a single chain pem file or individual files per each or one of the certificate in the chain...

Author: > @michalvavrik should it be an array of strings ? I'm not sure if TLS registry can have a single chain pem file or individual files per each or one of the certificate in the chain...

I think eventually it is always one string, like that is what you drop to the file system, but we will need to return `List<String>` because Vert.x WebClient options are created from individual pems and it concatenates them internally

I already have it in a progress, you will see it later and you can comment on that directly.

    return spiffeClient.getWorkloadCertificate()
            .invoke(cert -> {
                String spiffeId = cert.subject(); // <1>
                List<X509Certificate> chain = cert.certificateChain(); // <2>
                PrivateKey key = cert.privateKey(); // <3>
                List<X509Certificate> cas = cert.trustBundle(); // <4>
            });
}
----
<1> The SPIFFE ID from the leaf certificate's URI SAN, for example `spiffe://example.org/myservice`.
<2> The X.509 certificate chain with the leaf certificate first.

> <3> The PKCS#8 private key paired with the leaf certificate.

Reviewer: Michal, this is not really a concern of the Quarkus workload from the perspective of using a cert to authenticate to the remote target - we are not at the level yet where we want to manage this stuff dynamically, it will just explode to 200+ comments again if we start mixing it up.
In any case, the fact this private key is even travelling over the connection seems pretty bad to me.

Author: > Michal, this is not really a concern of the Quarkus workload from the perspective of using a cert to authenticate to the remote target

It is the main if not the only point endpoint. You need PK with cert chain.

> we are not at the level yet where we want to manage this stuff dynamically, it will just explode to 200+ comments again if we start mixing it up.

What is left if I drop it, useless x509-svid used for signing something you don't have? Again, I am very sorry if I miss something. (don't let me repeat it, it is true for all my comments)

>  In any case, the fact this private key is even travelling over the connection seems pretty bad to me.

this is local communication after "authentication", it doesn't to me

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Let me think...

return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken("https://other-service.example.com").map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

== Retrieve X.509-SVID

> The extension can also retrieve an X.509 workload certificate document (X.509-SVID), which includes a certificate chain, private key, and trust bundle as JCA objects and PEM strings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inject the SpiffeClient CDI bean to retrieve an X.509 workload certificate document (X.509-SVID) which includes a client certificate chain and private key, as well as a server trust bundle.
```

Suggesting to align it with the way the JWT-SVID section starts as `also` suggests some ordering but someone can land immediately on this section.

May be, alternatively both sections should briefly introduce their specific SVID types and then explain how to retrieve it.

For example, in this section, something like this:
```
X.509-SVID is X.509 workload certificate document which includes a client certificate chain and private key, as well as a server trust bundle.

To retrieve X509-SVID from the the SPIFFE Agent, inject the SpiffeClient CDI bean:
```

IMHO it might be a bit better.

return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken("https://other-service.example.com").map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

== Retrieve X.509-SVID

The extension can also retrieve an X.509 workload certificate document (X.509-SVID), which includes a certificate chain, private key, and trust bundle.
The certificate document provides Vert.x key-cert and trust options directly, so you can configure mTLS on any Vert.x or Quarkus HTTP client.

> === Vert.x WebClient

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Michal, I believe we discussed and agreed not to show it yet, the certificates are not reloading here, but you changed your mind and brought vert.x option into SPI

Author: > @michalvavrik Michal, I believe we discussed and agreed not to show it yet

It is just me interpreting your comments differently, I though you _also_ want to include a REST client example, which is what I did. I have no problem to not show it. I'll remove it.

> , the certificates are not reloading here, but you changed your mind and brought vert.x option into SPI

They are not, but that is a standard for a WebClient I guess, for example they weren't reloading for OIDC WebClient until very recently. This shows how to create a client and users would have to recreate it every 75 % TTL anyway.

I'l remove it.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik yeah, lets just keep the happy path covered with REST Client and TLS registry and evolve

Author: > @michalvavrik yeah, lets just keep the happy path covered with REST Client and TLS registry and evolve

agreed, done

<2> Configures client identity from the SPIFFE certificate chain and private key.
<3> Configures trust material from the trust bundle CA certificates with SPIFFE https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/X509-SVID.md#52-leaf-validation[X.509-SVID leaf validation].

=== Quarkus REST Client

The same certificate material can be wrapped in a `TlsConfiguration` for use with a programmatic Quarkus REST client:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.rest.client.reactive.QuarkusRestClientBuilder;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.SpiffeClient;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.WorkloadCertificateDocument;
import io.quarkus.tls.BaseTlsConfiguration;
import io.vertx.core.net.KeyCertOptions;
import io.vertx.core.net.TrustOptions;

WorkloadCertificateDocument cert = spiffeClient.getWorkloadCertificate()
        .await().indefinitely();

> TlsConfiguration tlsConfiguration = new BaseTlsConfiguration() { <1>

Reviewer: I don't know, you had the test setting it up, and we agreed to show that and that we'll keep evolving examples as we move along with closer TLS integration etc.

Author: > I don't know, you had the test setting it up, and we agreed to show that and that we'll keep evolving examples as we move along with closer TLS integration etc.

I think what you are hinting at here is the use of TLS configuration. I did try to use SSL context as you asked for, but Quarkus REST client throws that it doesn't support it, so I had to use the TLS configuration or rely on RESTEasy classic one (I guess, didn't try it), which is not a preferred REST stack.

If you want to present it differently, shoot.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik It is fine, we do want to show TLS config indeed, I was referring to bringing vert.x core - while it does look simpler, let's stick for the moment with a more verbose code and perhaps we'll make it eventually not visible at all with REST Client and TLS Reg combinations

Author: > @michalvavrik It is fine, we do want to show TLS config indeed, I was referring to bringing vert.x core - while it does look simpler, let's stick for the moment with a more verbose code and perhaps we'll make it eventually not visible at all with REST Client and TLS Reg combinations

I left REST client and TLS config in scenario when trust bundle doesn't contain SPIFFE certificates, so no extra validation, no disabling of hostname verification.

    @Override
    public KeyCertOptions getKeyStoreOptions() {
        return cert.keyMaterial().asVertxKeyCertOptions(); <2>
    }

>     @Override

Reviewer: I suppose it is reasonable to assume that the server is also using SPIFFE keystore - but it is not a must and we should be clear about that

Author: > I suppose it is reasonable to assume that the server is also using SPIFFE keystore - but it is not a must and we should be clear about that

Sure.

Author: > I suppose it is reasonable to assume that the server is also using SPIFFE keystore - but it is not a must and we should be clear about that

it is clear now from both a callout (I think the last one) under the REST client example, and also from the fact that I do not disable hostname verification.

Please see the xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#oidc-provider-client-authentication[OIDC provider client authentication] section of the OIDC code flow authentication guide and the xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc#oidc-client-authentication[OIDC Client authentication] section of the OIDC client guide for more information.

== Retrieve X.509-SVID

X.509-SVID is an X.509 workload certificate document which includes a client certificate chain and private key, as well as a server trust bundle.

To retrieve an X.509-SVID from the SPIFFE Agent, inject the `SpiffeClient` CDI bean:

=== Quarkus REST Client

The following example shows how to configure a Quarkus REST client with a retrieved X.509-SVID:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.rest.client.reactive.QuarkusRestClientBuilder;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.SpiffeClient;
import io.quarkus.spiffe.client.WorkloadCertificateDocument;
import io.quarkus.tls.BaseTlsConfiguration;
import io.vertx.core.buffer.Buffer;
import io.vertx.core.net.KeyCertOptions;
import io.vertx.core.net.PemKeyCertOptions;
import io.vertx.core.net.PemTrustOptions;
import io.vertx.core.net.TrustOptions;

> 

Reviewer: This should be some class and the code below in some init method

Author: > This should be some class and the code below in some init method

done, new review required though for I added a bulletpoint (<1>) you may want to read :-)

WorkloadCertificateDocument cert = spiffeClient.getWorkloadCertificate()
        .await().indefinitely();

TlsConfiguration tlsConfiguration = new BaseTlsConfiguration() {
    @Override
    public KeyCertOptions getKeyStoreOptions() {
        var options = new PemKeyCertOptions(); <1>

>         for (String pem : cert.certificateChain().certificateChainPem()) {

Reviewer: I'm not sure this reads well, and for the java objects, we'd have `certificateChain().certificateChain()`.

I was not quite happy to see cert chains and keys in diff formats mixed up in the same interface, withput any concrete cases against, but this code probably proves we can refactor it a bit.

IMHO, it should be `WorkloadCertificateChainPem` retrieved via `.certificateChainPem()` and then we have `.certificateChainPem().chain()` and `.certificateChainPem().privateKey()`.

Likewise for `X509Certificate` and `PrivateKey` we have `WorkloadCertificateChain` retrieved via `.certificateChain()` and then we have `.certificateChain().chain()` and `.certificateChain().privateKey()`.

What do you think ?

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Maybe the methods on the current `.certificateChain()` can be shortened instead to `chain()`, `chainPem()`. I'm not sure though grouping all the options together is ideal...  Let's try this one and see how it looks.

Author: > @michalvavrik Maybe the methods on the current `.certificateChain()` can be shortened instead to `chain()`, `chainPem()`. I'm not sure though grouping all the options together is ideal... Let's try this one and see how it looks.

I went with this, I like it @sberyozkin
